                                            SPIRe: Boosting LLM Inference Throughput with
                                                         Speculative Decoding


                                                Sanjit Neelam     Daniel Heinlein
                                                                                Vaclav Cvicek Akshay Mishra Reiner Pope
                                                                                  MatX
                                                              {sanjit,daniel,vaclav,akshay,reiner}@matx.com




arXiv:2504.06419v1 [cs.LG] 8 Apr 2025
                                                                                        Abstract
                                                   Speculative decoding (SD) has been shown to reduce the latency of autoregressive
                                                   decoding (AD) by 2-3× for small batch sizes. However, increasing throughput
                                                   and therefore reducing the cost per token requires decoding with large batch sizes.
                                                   Recent work shows that SD can accelerate decoding with large batch sizes too if the
                                                   context is sufficiently long and the draft model’s KV cache is sparse. We introduce
                                                   SPIRe, a draft model that combines static sparse attention, pruned initialization,
                                                   and feedback memory to increase the modeled throughput of speculative decoding
                                                   by over 100% compared to speculation with a much smaller draft model and by
                                                   over 35% compared to the strong baseline of sparse self-speculation. Our approach
                                                   is particularly effective when context lengths vary significantly across requests.


                                        1       Introduction
                                        Speculative decoding uses a cheap draft model to generate candidate tokens that are verified in
                                        parallel by an expensive target model [Leviathan et al., 2023, Chen et al., 2023]. Accepted draft
                                        tokens are guaranteed to be samples from the target model’s distribution over the next token by a
                                        modified rejection sampling scheme. If draft tokens are generated quickly enough and have a high
                                        enough acceptance rate, speculative decoding improves both the latency and throughput of decoding
                                        by reducing the number of memory accesses needed to generate each token1 .
                                        Optimizing speculative decoding for higher throughput requires different strategies than optimizing
                                        for lower latency; the latter is well-documented in the literature [Xia et al., 2024, Miao et al., 2024,
                                        Yan et al., 2025]. For example, low latency can often be achieved with small batch sizes [Pope et al.,
                                        2022] and small draft models are preferred in this setting since fetching weights is the bottleneck.
                                        On the other hand, high throughput requires large batch sizes, which enables the use of larger draft
                                        models since in this regime loading the KV cache is the bottleneck [Chen et al., 2024]. See Figure 1
                                        and Figure 4 for examples of how the speedup due to speculative decoding varies with draft model
                                        architecture, batch size, and context length according to our performance model below.
                                        Prior work has shown that the acceptance rate of draft tokens can be increased using the target
                                        model’s intermediate activations and output logits [Du et al., 2024, Zhou et al., 2024]. Since a target
                                        model’s state can be cached during training at negligible cost, and since inference rather than training
                                        accounts for most of the cost of serving an LLM, the investment in training a draft model aligned to a
                                        particular target model may be worthwhile. Indeed, we show in Cost Analysis that this is the case for
                                        SPIRe under conservative assumptions.
                                        Our work, along with Chen et al. [2024], demonstrates that speculative decoding is an effective
                                        technique for reducing the cost of decoding, and our work enables more efficient exploration of the
                                            1
                                             The cost is that speculative decoding always requires performing more FLOPs than autoregressive decoding;
                                        the draft model performs forward passes, and the target model performs forward passes on not only the draft
                                        tokens that are accepted but also those that are rejected. Thus, speculative decoding only makes sense if
                                        autoregressive decoding is sufficiently memory-bound.
Figure 1: Speedup of generating tokens in a batch of size B = 64 given a context of length L. A
round of speculation is the generation and subsequent verification of each block of k = 4 draft
tokens, the average generation length τ is the average number of tokens generated per round of
speculation, and speedup is τ divided by how much longer a round of speculation takes compared to
autoregressively decoding one token.


design space of draft models based on the batch sizes and context lengths expected in production.
Our main contributions are the following:

       • An implementation-agnostic model for evaluating the throughput of speculative decoding
         with different draft models.
       • An efficient method for training a Feedback Transformer draft model.
       • A draft model, SPIRe, that increases the modeled throughput of speculative decoding by
         over 100% compared to vanilla speculative decoding and by over 35% compared to the
         strong baseline of MagicDec [Chen et al., 2024].

2   Evaluation Metric
It is problematic to compare different methods of training the draft model using the throughput
achieved by the resulting models in a production environment. Measured throughput depends on
myriad implementation details such as use of specialized kernels [Dao et al., 2022], how models are
partitioned across chips [Pope et al., 2022], how queries are batched [Daniel et al., 2023], and which
queries are used for evaluation [Zhou et al., 2024]. Any of these variables could be confounders when
comparing different draft model architectures.
To derive a proxy for measured throughput, we first note that the throughput of speculative decoding
is equal to the throughput of vanilla decoding multiplied by
                 Throughput    E[# Tokens Generated per Round of Speculation]
                             =
                  Multiplier                    k×tdraft +tverify
                                                          ttarget

where k is the maximum speculation depth, a round of speculation is the generation and sub-
sequent verification of each block of k draft tokens, tdraft and ttarget are the latencies of a draft
and target model forward pass on a single token, and tverify is the latency of a target model
forward pass on k + 1 draft tokens in parallel. In the sequel, we refer to the average genera-
tion length τ := E[# Tokens Generated per Round of Speculation] and the iteration time multiplier
        k×tdraft +tverify
∆t :=       ttarget       , so that the throughput multiplier is simply τ /∆t.


                                                  2
To obtain a more implementation-agnostic expression for ∆t, we can break down the cost of a forward
pass into the compute cost and the memory cost, which are the number of FLOPs and the number of
memory accesses that need to be performed. The memory cost can be further broken down into the
size of the LLM’s weights and the size of its KV cache. By multiplying the memory cost in bytes
with the hardware operational intensity (HOI) in FLOPs per byte, we can obtain an estimate of the
memory cost in FLOP-equivalents [MatX, 2025] and compare the compute and memory costs on
equal footing. Assuming that computation and memory accesses are maximally overlapped2 , we
obtain the following expression for the cost of a forward pass.
            Forward Cost = max(Compute Cost, (Weight Cost + KV Cache Cost) ×HOI)
                               |   {z     } |              {z            }
                                            FLOPs                           Bytes
                                                         |                          {z                }
                                                                   Memory Cost (FLOP-equivalents)


Finally, by substituting tdraft , tverify , and ttarget with their corresponding forward costs, we obtain the
following implementation-agnostic3 approximation of the throughput multiplier and use it as our
evaluation metric.
          Throughput           E[# Tokens Generated per Round of Speculation]
                      ≈ k×max(C ,(N +KV )×HOI)+max((k+1)×C ,(N +KV )×HOI)
           Multiplier          draft draft draft               target target target
                                                    max(Ctarget ,(Ntarget +KVtarget )×HOI)

Here, Cdraft is the number of FLOPs performed during a forward pass through the draft model, Ndraft
is the size of the draft model’s weights in bytes, KVdraft is the size of the draft model’s KV cache in
bytes, and similarly for Ctarget , Ntarget , and KVtarget .

3     SPIRe
We combine the following techniques when training our draft model SPIRe in order to increase the
throughput multiplier of speculative decoding. The name SPIRe stands for Sparse KV cache, Pruned
Initialization, and Recurrent Feedback Transformer.

3.1   Sliding window KV cache with attention sink

In the large-batch long-context regime, the memory cost of loading the KV cache is the dominant
cost of decoding, and reducing the size of the KV cache can reduce the iteration time multiplier ∆t
by a larger factor than it reduces the average generation length τ . Following MagicDec we use a
StreamingLLM attention mask4 [Xiao et al., 2024], during training and inference, to ensure the draft
model’s KV cache is sparse and that the size of the KV cache is constant with respect to the decoding
sequence length. As shown in Figure 4, this results in an increase in the throughput multiplier as the
batch size increases, which is never the case for vanilla speculative decoding.

3.2   Initialize by pruning the target model

In our experiments with an eight-layer target model, we initialized the draft model using the embed-
ding layer, the last two transformer blocks, and the unembedding layer of the trained target model.
As shown in Figure 5, initializing by pruning the target model produced a significantly higher value
of τ than random initialization. Matching the embedding dimension of the target and draft models
allowed us to further improve the quality of the draft model, as we’ll explain below. Future work
could explore more sophisticated pruning strategies, such as the one described by Muralidharan et al.
[2024].
    2
      Optimized inference stacks with e.g. pipeline parallelism approach this ideal. Throughput multipliers are
higher than if we assumed that computation and memory accesses could not be overlapped, in which case we
would have Decode Cost = Compute Cost + Memory Cost.
    3
      The inclusion of HOI in the throughput multiplier makes it hardware-dependent, but this only makes a
difference in the compute-bound (bottom-left) region of Figure 4. When decoding and verification are both
memory-bound, HOI cancels out.
    4
      Xiao et al. [2024] use positions within the cache rather than those in the original text when adding positional
information to tokens. We do the latter for SPIRe and the former for our implementation of MagicDec.


                                                          3
With short-to-medium contexts, MagicDec may underperform vanilla speculative decoding and even
autoregressive decoding because the large increase in FLOPs outweighs the small decrease in KV
cache loads. Given that context lengths vary considerably in production, we sought a draft model
which accelerates decoding across a wide range of context lengths. Consequently, our draft model
has 14 th as many parameters as the target model (ignoring embedding and unembedding parameters,
which become negligible as the models are scaled up).

3.3   Feedback Transformer and attending to target model activations

Feedback memory [Fan et al., 2021] was proposed to increase the representation capacity of Trans-
formers, creating Feedback Transformers with stronger performance at any given inference cost.
They are significantly more expensive to train, however, because they inhibit parallelism over the
context length. Fortunately, we find that this disadvantage can be almost entirely mitigated when
training a draft model, since we can arrange for very short draft rollouts. Furthermore, the additional
performance due to feedback memory has been shown to be even greater for shallow models such as
ours, and a shallower draft model is preferable for its smaller forward pass latency tdraft .
The ℓ-th attention sublayer of the Feedback Transformer computes
                                        zℓt = Attention(xℓt , m<t )

using memory vectors mt instead of the standard zℓt = Attention(xℓt , xℓ<t ). The memory vectors mt
are defined as
                                          Pnlayer            ℓ
                                            ℓ=0 exp(wℓ ) · xt
                                  mt = P      nlayer
                                              ℓ=0 exp(wℓ )

where xℓt is the activation of the t-th token after the ℓ-th layer, (wℓ ) ∈ Rnlayer +1 are learnable weights,
and layer 0 is the embedding layer. The dependence of each memory vector on all activations from
the previous timestep does not increase the latency of decoding tokens autoregressively, but it does
prevent training and prefill from being parallelized.
We require our Feedback Transformer draft model to be able to generate blocks of k tokens given
contexts of various lengths, where k is the maximum speculation depth. Thus during training, rather
than performing S forward passes on a prefix of length S, we perform just k forward passes: we
forego computing the first S − k memory vectors by substituting them with target model activations.




Figure 2: The matrix QK ⊤ in the 1st and 4th forward passes on a training sequence of length L = 12
with a maximum speculation depth of k = 4. In general we perform k forward passes on every k-th
prefix of a sequence, in a process similar to batched autoregressive decoding with teacher forcing.


                                                     4
Specifically, during training, our Feedback Transformer draft model autoregressively generates k = 4
tokens following every k-th prefix of a sequence by performing k forward passes. Unlike Fan
et al. [2021], we share neither key and value projections nor memory vectors across layers: for
t = S − k + 1, . . . , S, where S ∈ {k, 2k, . . . , L} is the length of a prefix, the memory vectors mit
for the i-th layer are defined as
                                             Pnlayer                ℓ
                                                 ℓ=0 exp(wiℓ ) · xt
                                      mit = P       nlayer
                                                    ℓ=0 exp(wiℓ )

where (wiℓ ) ∈ Rnlayer ×(nlayer +1) are learnable weights. For t = 1, . . . , S − k, we let mit = yti+6−1 ,
where ytℓ is the target model activation of the t-th token after the ℓ-th layer. In other words, the
weights of the first (second) layer of the draft model are initialized from the weights of the seventh
(eighth) layer of the target model, and we let m1t = yt6 , m2t = yt7 for t = 1, . . . , S − k.
If we did not match the embedding dimension of the draft and target model, we could have substituted
past memory vectors with draft model embeddings, but this was worse than substituting with target
model activations in our experiments. Our approach was also better than sharing memory vectors
across layers and substituting past memory vectors with either draft model embeddings or post-final-
layer target model activations.

3.4   Distillation loss

Early implementations of speculative decoding for LLMs [Leviathan et al., 2023, Chen et al., 2023]
optimize the draft model’s parameters by minimizing the standard cross-entropy loss
                                              "                                  #
                                                  X
                    HardTargetLoss = Ex<t ∼D −        pdata (x<t )i log q(x<t )i
                                                        i∈V

where x<t is a prefix sampled from a dataset D, pdata (x<t ) is a one-hot vector corresponding to
the token that follows x<t , q(x<t ) is a dense vector corresponding to the draft model’s probability
distribution of the token that follows x<t , and V is the vocabulary size. To train a draft model to
produce outputs that are more similar to the outputs of the target model, we minimize
                                         "                                   #
                                             X
         MixedLoss(ω) = ω · Ex<t ∼D −            ptarget (x<t )i log q(x<t )i + (1 − ω) · (−α)
                                              i∈V

where ptarget (x<t ) is a dense vector corresponding to the target model’s probability distribution of
the token that follows x<t and α is the expected acceptance probability [Leviathan et al., 2023].
Minimizing the first term minimizes the distillation loss [Hinton et al., 2015], and minimizing the
second term maximizes the average generation length τ . As shown in Figure 5, ω = 0.5 marginally
outperformed ω = 1.

4     Evaluation
We fix an 8-layer, 67-million body-parameter multi-head attention target model and vary the draft
model, with all model architecture details provided in the Appendix. Each model with N total-
parameters is trained on 20 × N tokens [Hoffmann et al., 2022] from the LongCrawl64 dataset
[Buckman, 2024] using sequences of length 1024. We compare drafting tokens for the target model
using the following draft models:

      1. Vanilla speculative decoding [Chen et al., 2023]. This draft model has 18 th as many body
         parameters as the target model, and is trained by minimizing the standard cross-entropy loss.
         This is the most widely understood implementation of speculative decoding, and, as can be
         seen in Figures 1 and 4, it is strong for short contexts and small batch sizes.
      2. MagicDec [Chen et al., 2024]. This draft model is identical to the target model, but it
         sparsely accesses its KV cache through a StreamingLLM attention mask with a window size
         of 64 and a sink size of 1. This is an elegant implementation of speculative decoding, and is
         strong in the large-batch long-context regime.


                                                    5
      3. SPIRe (ours). This draft model was described above in detail, and it has 14 th as many body
         parameters as the target model. During both training and inference, we use a StreamingLLm
         attention mask with a window size of 64 and a sink size of 1.

We measure average generation lengths τ by generating G = 64 tokens given n = 65536 contexts
from the validation split of the LongCrawl64 dataset, and we calculate iteration time multipliers ∆t
for different batch sizes and context lengths using our performance model.
We use τ ’s corresponding to a medium context length of L = 512 to calculate all throughput
multipliers τ /∆t in Figures 1, 4, 5, and 6, by assuming that τ is the same when generating with
shorter or longer contexts. Table 1 shows that the average generation length τ is similar for contexts
of length L ∈ {256, 512, 960}, and our assumption is supported by e.g. Figure 5 of Xiao et al. [2024],
which suggests that even with extremely long contexts, it suffices to attend to the most recent tokens.

Table 1: Average generation lengths τ , with 95% confidence intervals, for different draft models and
context lengths. Using a maximum speculation depth of k = 4, each round of speculation generates
between 1 and 5 tokens, with between 0 and 4 tokens accepted before the first rejection.
                Context Length      Vanilla SD        MagicDec            SPIRe
                960                2.644 ± 0.004       3.793 ± 0.004    3.382 ± 0.004
                512                2.647 ± 0.004       3.891 ± 0.004    3.401 ± 0.004
                256                2.637 ± 0.004       4.005 ± 0.004    3.427 ± 0.004

We focus on a medium context of 512 tokens since we care about accelerating decoding across a
range of context lengths. If a context of 128K is considered "long" for Llama 3 70B [Team, 2024],
then a context of 64K may be considered "medium". As shown in Figure 3, 64K is four powers of
two larger than the longest context Lcrit for which verification with Llama 3 70B is compute-bound at
some batch size. A context length of 512 is four powers of two larger than Lcrit = 32 for our target
model, so we consider a context of 512 to be of medium length.




Figure 3: With a sufficiently long context, verification may never be compute-bound even in the limit
as batch size tends to infinity. For context lengths where verification is compute bound for some batch
size Bcrit , there’s no benefit in terms of throughput (and some cost in terms of latency) to increasing
batch size above Bcrit .


4.1   Results

Our draft model SPIRe produces the largest increase in the modeled throughput of generating tokens
for most batch sizes and context lengths, as shown in Figure 4. SPIRe achieves a lower average


                                                   6
generation length τ than MagicDec, but drafting with SPIRe nevertheless produces a larger speedup
due to its lower cost of performing forward passes.




Figure 4: Speedup of generating tokens in a batch of size B given a context of length L. Using the
highlighted values, we get that SPIRe increases the modeled throughput of speculative decoding by
100% compared to vanilla speculative decoding and by 35% compared to MagicDec.

Figure 1 is derived from Figure 4 by focusing on a batch size of B = 64. For medium contexts of
around 512 tokens, Figure 3 shows that the operational intensity of verification barely increases as we
increase the verification batch size beyond k × 64 = 4 × 64 = 256, but it does increase significantly
as the verification batch size is increased from 1 to 64.

4.2   Ablations

See Figure 5 for ablations of the techniques used to train our draft model SPIRe. To ablate the
sparse KV cache, we conservatively assume the same average generation length τ as SPIRe, and use
our performance model to calculate new throughput multipliers. We ablate the other techniques by
training new draft models and evaluating them.
The throughput multiplier for SPIRe (without sparse KV cache) is constant with respect to the context
length L in Figure 5 since here the memory cost of generating a token is higher than the compute
cost, and since k = 4 and Ntarget = 4 × Ndraft , L cancels out in our expression for the iteration time
multiplier ∆t.

4.3   Extrapolation

What if we extrapolate the results above to drafting for Llama 3 70B while maintaining the ratio
Ndraft /Ntarget , by assuming the same values of the average generation length τ but recalculating


                                                  7
Figure 5: Ablations of the techniques used to train our draft model SPIRe. In order of importance,
the techniques are 1) sparse KV cache, 2) attending to target model activations, 3) distillation loss, 4)
initializing by pruning the target model, 5) feedback memory, and 6) MixedLoss.


iteration time multipliers using our performance model? Our draft model SPIRe produces the largest
increase in the modeled throughput of generating tokens for most context lengths supported by LLM
providers, as shown in Figure 6.




Figure 6: Estimated speedup of generating tokens from Llama 3 70B in a batch of size B given a
context of length L. This figure is very similar, but not identical, to Figure 1.


5   Cost Analysis
Each draft model costs a different amount in training FLOPs. We ignore FLOPs due to embedding
and unembedding parameters, which become negligible as the draft model is scaled up. The cost to


                                                   8
train our draft model SPIRe is around 14 th the cost to train the target model, since it has 14 th as many
body parameters but achieves lower MFU during training.
Suppose that training the target model costs 1 unit of our compute budget, and that we expect to
spend 10 units generating tokens for customers using autoregressive decoding. Using our draft model
SPIRe for speculative decoding with (B, L) = (64, 512) amounts to investing 0.25 to train the draft
model but saving 10 × (1 − 1/2.78) = 6.40 units in decoding cost, and drafting with MagicDec
amounts to saving 10 × (1 − 1/2.05) = 5.12 units in decoding cost (the throughput multipliers 2.78
and 2.05 are highlighted in Figure 4). Overall, SPIRe saves 6.15 units, or over 20% more than what
MagicDec saves.
If we again extrapolate our results to drafting for Llama 3 70B with (B, L) = (64, 65536), we
find that drafting with SPIRe saves 10 × (1 − 1/2.82) = 6.45 units in decoding cost and drafting
with MagicDec saves 10 × (1 − 1/2.14) = 5.33 units (the throughput multipliers 2.82 and 2.14
are highlighted in the Appendix). Overall, SPIRe saves 6.20 units, or over 16% more than what
MagicDec saves. If there is significant downward variation in batch sizes and context lengths, then
SPIRe outperforms MagicDec by a much greater amount in terms of decoding cost saved.


6   Related Work

       • The only other work we’re aware of which attempts to use speculative decoding to increase
         the throughput of decoding, rather than to minimize latency, is MagicDec [Chen et al.,
         2024].
       • Continuous batching reduces the need for speculative decoding, but both techniques are
         complementary. In vLLM, speculative decoding is integrated with the system’s continuous
         batching architecture, and studying their interaction further is an interesting direction for
         future work.
       • Our technique is orthogonal to any technique used to accelerate prefill. In practice, acceler-
         ating both prefill and decoding is important for reducing the cost per token generated.
       • We used the token verification algorithm in our experiments, but our results should hold
         when using the block verification [Sun et al., 2024] algorithm too.


7   Conclusion

Minimizing cost per token requires maximizing throughput. We demonstrated that draft model
architecture significantly impacts throughput, with optimal choices depending on the batch sizes
and context lengths expected in production. We proposed an implementation-agnostic performance
model for evaluating the throughput of speculative decoding with different draft models, and we
proposed a draft model SPIRe which outperforms strong baselines when decoding with large batch
sizes and medium-to-long contexts. Future work can empirically validate our performance model,
use a more principled long-context evaluation, and analyze the sensitivity of speedup with respect to
the maximum speculation depth k.


8   Contributions and Acknowledgments

Sanjit Neelam proposed most aspects of the architecture of our draft model SPIRe. Feedback
Transformer was suggested by Reiner Pope, and attending to target activations was co-developed
by Sanjit Neelam and Reiner Pope. Explicitly maximizing the expected acceptance probability α
was proposed by Akshay Mishra. The evaluation methodology was co-designed by Sanjit Neelam
and Reiner Pope. All experiments were conducted by Sanjit Neelam, who also wrote all text and
produced all figures. Daniel Heinlein and Vaclav Cvicek provided valuable feedback that improved
the presentation of results.
We use seqax, our research-focused LLM codebase built on JAX, to perform all experiments. This
work was supported by Cloud TPUs from Google’s TPU Research Cloud.


                                                    9
Appendix
See https://github.com/MatX-inc/seqax/blob/SPIRe/spire_appendix.ipynb.

References
Jacob Buckman. Longcrawl64: A Long-Context Natural-Language Dataset, 2024. URL https:
  //manifestai.com/articles/longcrawl64/.

Charlie Chen, Sebastian Borgeaud, Geoffrey Irving, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Laurent Sifre, and John
  Jumper. Accelerating large language model decoding with speculative sampling, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.01318.

Jian Chen, Vashisth Tiwari, Ranajoy Sadhukhan, Zhuoming Chen, Jinyuan Shi, Ian En-Hsu Yen, and
   Beidi Chen. Magicdec: Breaking the latency-throughput tradeoff for long context generation with
   speculative decoding, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.11049v3.

Cade Daniel, Chen Shen, Eric Liang, and Richard Liaw. How continuous batching enables 23x
  throughput in llm inference while reducing p50 latency. https://www.anyscale.com/blog/
  continuous-batching-llm-inference, 2023. Accessed: 2025-02-10.

Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Flashattention: Fast and
  memory-efficient exact attention with io-awareness, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2205.14135.

Cunxiao Du, Jing Jiang, Xu Yuanchen, Jiawei Wu, Sicheng Yu, Yongqi Li, Shenggui Li, Kai Xu,
  Liqiang Nie, Zhaopeng Tu, and Yang You. Glide with a cape: A low-hassle method to accelerate
  speculative decoding, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.02082.

Angela Fan, Thibaut Lavril, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar. Addressing
  some limitations of transformers with feedback memory, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2002.09402.

Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network, 2015.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531.

Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom
  Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy,
  Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Laurent Sifre.
  Training compute-optimal large language models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.
  15556.

Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. Fast inference from transformers via speculative
  decoding, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.17192.

MatX. Optimize for inference too, not just training flops. https://matx.com/research/
 lifetime_llm_cost, 2025. Accessed: 2025-03-07.

Xupeng Miao, Gabriele Oliaro, Zhihao Zhang, Xinhao Cheng, Zeyu Wang, Zhengxin Zhang, Rae
 Ying Yee Wong, Alan Zhu, Lijie Yang, Xiaoxiang Shi, Chunan Shi, Zhuoming Chen, Daiyaan
 Arfeen, Reyna Abhyankar, and Zhihao Jia. Specinfer: Accelerating large language model serving
 with tree-based speculative inference and verification. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Interna-
  tional Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems,
 Volume 3, ASPLOS ’24, page 932–949. ACM, April 2024. doi: 10.1145/3620666.3651335. URL
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3620666.3651335.

Saurav Muralidharan, Sharath Turuvekere Sreenivas, Raviraj Joshi, Marcin Chochowski, Mostofa
  Patwary, Mohammad Shoeybi, Bryan Catanzaro, Jan Kautz, and Pavlo Molchanov. Compact
  language models via pruning and knowledge distillation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2407.14679.


                                               10
Reiner Pope, Sholto Douglas, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Jacob Devlin, James Bradbury, Anselm
  Levskaya, Jonathan Heek, Kefan Xiao, Shivani Agrawal, and Jeff Dean. Efficiently scaling
  transformer inference, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.05102.
Ziteng Sun, Uri Mendlovic, Yaniv Leviathan, Asaf Aharoni, Ahmad Beirami, Jae Hun Ro, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Block verification accelerates speculative decoding, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2403.10444.
Llama Team. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
Heming Xia, Zhe Yang, Qingxiu Dong, Peiyi Wang, Yongqi Li, Tao Ge, Tianyu Liu, Wenjie Li, and
  Zhifang Sui. Unlocking efficiency in large language model inference: A comprehensive survey of
  speculative decoding, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.07851.
Guangxuan Xiao, Yuandong Tian, Beidi Chen, Song Han, and Mike Lewis. Efficient streaming
  language models with attention sinks, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.17453.
Minghao Yan, Saurabh Agarwal, and Shivaram Venkataraman. Decoding speculative decoding, 2025.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01528.
Yongchao Zhou, Kaifeng Lyu, Ankit Singh Rawat, Aditya Krishna Menon, Afshin Rostamizadeh,
  Sanjiv Kumar, Jean-François Kagy, and Rishabh Agarwal. Distillspec: Improving speculative
  decoding via knowledge distillation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08461.




                                              11
